.TH HELENCTL 1 "2026-04-23" "Helen 1.0" "Helen Operator Commands"
.SH NAME
helenctl \- unified operator CLI for Helen-Server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B helenctl
.I command
[\fIargs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBhelenctl\fR bundles service control, health checks, diagnostics,
backup/restore, cluster management, role toggling, and emergency
commands behind one namespace. It talks to the local Helen-Server via
loopback HTTP and systemd.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B status
Show systemd service state plus the control-plane phase, CPU, RSS, socket and
room counts.
.TP
.B logs [\-f] [\-n N]
Tail journald output for the service. \fB\-f\fR follows.
.TP
.B health
Quick probe of /api/health. Exit 0 on 200, non-zero otherwise — suitable for
monitoring hooks.
.TP
.B check
Run pre-flight checks + validate config files.
.TP
.B diag [path]
Collect a tar.gz of system info, journald logs, config, state, and network
configuration (sensitive values redacted).
.TP
.B backup [path] [\-\-include-secret] [\-\-include-config]
Snapshot DB + state files atomically. SQLite backed up via the .backup
pragma so the copy is consistent.
.TP
.B restore <bundle>
Restore from a backup. The current DATADIR is moved aside to a savepoint
first, so a bad bundle can be undone.
.TP
.B upgrade <bin-dir>
Blue/green swap — renames current binary, installs new one, runs a smoke test.
Rolls back automatically if health fails.
.TP
.B cert rotate
Regenerate the self-signed TLS cert with helen.local + current LAN IP as SANs.
.TP
.B cluster list|join|leave
Manage the node registry. Call \fBjoin\fR on a second Helen-Server to
register this one against it.
.TP
.B role <name> <on|off>
Toggle a server role (\fIsfu\fR, \fIrelay\fR, \fIrecording\fR, etc.).
.TP
.B policy <mode>
Force policy_mode (auto | chat_only | audio_only | video_ok | no_sfu_p2p_only |
no_relay).
.TP
.B emergency freeze|exit
Enter or leave emergency phase. \fBfreeze\fR requires a secret-admin token.
.TP
.B roles
Print the full role + policy + threshold table.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HELEN_BASE
Helen-Server URL (default: \fBhttp://127.0.0.1:3000\fR).
.TP
.B HELEN_ADMIN_TOKEN
Bearer JWT for admin-role endpoints.
.TP
.B HELEN_SECRET_TOKEN
Session token from /api/secret-admin/auth for privileged actions.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/helen/server.env
Environment sourced by systemd unit.
.TP
.B /var/lib/helen/
Data directory (DB, roles, access codes, audit).
.TP
.B /var/log/helen/
Log directory.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
# Quick triage on a misbehaving server
sudo helenctl status
sudo helenctl logs -n 200
sudo helenctl check
sudo helenctl diag /tmp/

# Rotate the self-signed cert after changing host IP
sudo helenctl cert rotate && sudo systemctl restart helen-server

# Temporarily force all rooms into audio-only mode
HELEN_ADMIN_TOKEN=... helenctl policy audio_only

# Back up before an upgrade, then swap binaries
sudo helenctl backup --include-config
sudo helenctl upgrade /tmp/new-release/Helen-Server/
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP 4
.B 0
success
.TP
.B 1
generic failure
.TP
.B 2
invalid usage
.TP
.B 3
operation declined (e.g., upgrade rolled back)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR sysctl (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Helen operations team.
